CHAPTER I

But, you may say, we asked you to speak about
women and fiction—what has that got to do with
a room of one’s own? I will try to explain. When you
asked me to speak about women and fiction I sat
down on the banks of a river and began to Wonder
what the words meant. They might mean simply a
few remarks about Fanny Burney; a few more about
Jane Austen; a tribute to the Brontes and a sketch
of Haworth Parsonage under snow; some witticisms
if possible about Miss Mitford; a respectful allusion
to George Eliot; a reference to Mrs. Gaskell and
one would have done. But at second sight the words
seemed not so simple. The title women and fiction
might mean, and you may have meant it to mean,
women and what they are like; or it might mean
women and the fiction that they write; or it might

1 This essay is based upon two papers read to the Arts
Society at Newnham and the Odtaa at Girton in October
1928. The papers were too long to be read in full, and
have since been altered and expanded.



mean women and the fiction that is written about
them; or it might mean that somehow all three are
inextricably mixed together and you want me to
consider them in that light. But when I began to
consider the subj ect in this last way, which seemed the
most interesting, I soon saw that it had one fatal
drawback. I should never be able to come to a
conclusion. I should never be able to fulfil what is,
I understand, the first duty of a lecturer—to hand
you after an hour’s discourse a nugget of pure
truth to wrap up between the pages of your note¬
books and keep on the mantelpiece for ever. All I
could do was to offer you an opinion upon one
minor point—a woman must have money and a
room of her own if she is to write fiction; and that,
as you will see, leaves the great problem of the true
nature of woman and the true nature of fiction
unsolved. I have shirked the duty of coming to a
conclusion upon these two questions—women and
fiction remain, so far as I am concerned, unsolved
problems. But in order to make some amends I
am going to do what I can to show you how I
arrived at this opinion about the room and the
money. I am going to develop in your presence as
fully and freely as I can the train of thought which
led me to think this. Perhaps if I lay bare the ideas,


the prejudices, that lie behind this statement you
will find that they have some bearing upon women
and some upon fiction. At any rate, when a subject
is highly controversial—and any question about sex
is that—one cannot hope to tell the truth. One can
only show how one came to hold whatever opinion
one does hold. One can only give one’s audience
the chance of drawing their own conclusions as
they observe the limitations, the prejudices, the
idiosyncrasies of the speaker. Fiction here is likely
to contain more truth than fact. Therefore I pro¬
pose, making use of all the liberties and licences of
a novelist, to tell you the story of the two days that
preceded my coming here—how, bowed down by
the weight of the subject which you have laid upon
my shoulders, I pondered it, and made it work in
and out of my daily life. I need not say that what
I am about to describe has no existence; Oxbridge
is an invention; so is Fernham; “I” is only a con¬
venient term for somebody who has no real being.
Lies will flow from my lips, but there may perhaps
be some truth mixed up with them; it is for you to
seek out this truth and to decide whether any part
of it is worth keeping. If not, you will of course
throw the whole of it into the waste-paper basket
and forget all about it.



Here then was I (call me Mary Beton, Mary
Seton, Mary Carmichael or by any name you
please—it is not a matter of any importance) sitting
on the banks of a river a week or two ago in fine
October weather, lost in thought. That collar I
have spoken of, women and fiction, the need of
coming to some conclusion on a subject that raises
all sorts of prejudices and passions, bowed my head
to the ground. To the right and left bushes of some
sort, golden and crimson, glowed with the colour,
even it seemed burnt with the heat, of fire. On
the further bank the willows wept in perpetual
lamentation, their hair about their shoulders. The
river reflected whatever it chose of sky and bridge
and burning tree, and when the undergraduate had
'oared his 'boat through the reflections they closed
again, completely, as if he had never been. There
one might have sat the clock round lost in thought.
Thought—to call it by a prouder name than it
deserved—had let its line down into the stream. It
swayed, minute after minute, hither and thither
among the reflections and the weeds, letting the
water lift it and sink it, until—you know the little
tug—the sudden conglomeration of an idea at the
end of one’s line: and then the cautiou^ hauling of
it in, and the careful laying of it out? Alas, laid on


the grass how small, how insignificant this thought
of mine looked; the sort of fish that a good fisher¬
man puts back into the water so that it may grow
fatter and be one day worth cooking and eating.
I will not trouble you with that thought now,
though if you look carefully you may find it for
yourselves in the course of what I am going to say.

But however small it was, it had, nevertheless,
the mysterious property of its kind—put back into
the mind, it became at once very exciting, and
important; and as it darted and sank, and flashed
hither and thither, set up such a wash and tumult
of ideas that it was impossible to sit still. It was
thus that I found myself walking with extreme
rapidity across a^&sSplot. Instantly a man’s figure
rose to intercept me. No/ did I at first understand
that the gesticulations of a curious-looking object,
in a cut-away coat and evening shirt, were aimed
at me. His face expressed horror and indignation.
Instinct rather than reason came to my helg; he
was a Beadle; I was a woman. This was the turf;
there was the path. Only the Fellows and Scholars
are allowed here; the gravel is the place for me.
Such thoughts were the work of a moment. As I
regained the path the arms of the Beadle sank, his
face assumed its usual repose, and though turf is
